README.md, before:

# arc

Lightweight, in-memory, optionally persistent, 100% JavaScript document database. Use it in node. Use it in the browser with the localStorage adapter. Use it as the embedded database solution for your electron app.

*This library is under active development and the API is likely to evolve as features are expanded, however it's unlikely that there will be any breaking changes.*

* [Installation](#installation)
* [API overview](#api-overview)
  * [Creating a collection](#creating-a-collection)
  * [Persistence](#persistence)
    * [Storage adapters](#storage-adapters)
    * [Using another adapter](#using-another-adapter)
    * [Auto sync](#auto-sync)
  * [Indexing](#indexing)
  * [Inserting](#inserting)
  * [Finding](#finding)
  * [Updating](#updating)
  * [Removing](#removing)
  * [Query options](#query-options)
    * [ifNull](#ifnull)
    * [ifEmpty](#ifempty)
    * [Sorting](#sorting)
    * [Skip & take (i.e. LIMIT)](#skip--take-ie-limit)
    * [Projection](#projection)
      * [Implicit exclusion](#implicit-exclusion)
      * [Implicit inclusion](#implicit-inclusion)
      * [Explicit](#explicit)
    * [Aggregation](#aggregation)
    * [Joining](#joining)
  * [Misc](#misc)
    * [Builtin property name defaults](#builtin-property-name-defaults)
    * [Documents](#documents)

# Installation

```bash
npm i @prsm/arc
```

# API overview

For a more thorough API reference, please look at the tests in this repository.

## Creating a collection

A collection is just a `.json` file when you're using the default `FSAdapter`.

```typescript
import { Collection } from "@prsm/arc";

type Planet = {
  planet: string;
  diameter: number;
  population?: number;
  temp: {
    avg: number;
  };
};

// from `./.data` load or create `planets.json`
const collection = new Collection<Planet>(".data", "planets");
```

## Persistence

### Storage adapters

How data is read and written depends on which `StorageAdapter` the collection is using. The default storage adapter is the `FSAdapter` and, unsurprisingly, it reads and writes to a file. For persistence in a browser environment, you can use the provided `LocalStorageAdapter`, or create your own adapter by implementing the `StorageAdapter` interface. There is also an `EncryptedFSAdapter`, which encrypts before writing and decrypts before reading.

### Using another adapter

```typescript
import { EncryptedFSAdapter } from "@prsm/arc";

process.env.ARC_ENCFS_KEY = "Mahpsee2X7TKLe1xwJYmar91pCSaZIY7";

const path = ".data";
const name = "planets";

const adapter = new EncryptedFSAdapter(path, name);
new Collection(path, name, { adapter });
```

### Auto sync

By default, any operation that mutates data is followed by a sync using whichever adapter the collection was initialized with. You can disable this `autosync` feature when creating the collection:

```typescript
new Collection(".data", "planets", { autosync: false });
```

When `autosync` is disabled, you must call `collection.sync()` to persist, which calls the in-use adapter's `write` method.

## Indexing

- Indexes can be deeply nested properties, e.g.: `createIndex({ key: "planet.composition.type" })`

  When defining indexes using dot notation, the performance benefit of using indexes is the same whether you choose to find documents by using dot notation syntax or object syntax. In other words, the queries below provide the same performance benefit.

  ```typescript
  find({ "planet.composition.type": "gas" });
  find({ planet: { composition: { type: "gas" }}});
  ```

- The value of the key ***must*** be either number or string.
- Indexes can optionally enforce a unique constraint, e.g.: `createIndex({ key: "planet.life.dominant_species", unique: true })`
- You can create an index at any time, even if your database has existing records with the index key provided, although ideally they are defined at the point of database creation.

In large databases, ***especially*** with complex documents, you will see a noticeable performance boost when making practical use of indexes:

In a collection made up of 1,000,000 documents of moderately complex shape:

```typescript
{
  name: string
  age: number,
  thing: number[],
  things: { a: { b: number }, b: { stuff: number[] } },
}
```

- With an index on `age`, a `find({ age: 350_000 })` takes an average of 25ms.
- Without an index on `age`, a `find({ age: 350_000 })` takes an average of 2s.

YMMV.

## Inserting

See the [inserting tests](tests/specs/insert/basic.test.ts) for more examples.

```typescript
insert({ planet: "Mercury", diameter: 4_880, temp: { avg: 475 } });
insert([
  { planet: "Venus", diameter: 12_104, temp: { avg: 737_000 } },
  { planet: "Earth", diameter: 12_742, temp: { avg: 288 } },
]);
```

## Finding

See the [finding tests](tests/specs/finding/basic.test.ts) for more examples.

```typescript
// finds Earth document
find({ avg: 288 }); // implicit deep searching
find({ planet: "Earth" });

// finds Venus and Earth documents
find({ diameter: { $gt: 12_000 } });

// finds Mercury and Earth documents
find({ temp: { avg: { $lt: 1_000 } } });

// finds Mercury and Earth documents
find({ $and: [{ avg: { $gt: 100 } }, { avg: { $lt: 10_000 } }] });

// etc.
find({ $not: { a: 1, b: 2 } });
find({ $and: [{ $not: { a: { $lte: 2 }}}, { $not: { a: { $gte: 5 }}}] });
find({ $xor: [{ a: { $includes: "ba" } }, { num: { $lt: 9 } }] });
find({ a: { $oneOf: [2, 3] } });
find({ a: { $length: 3 } }); // string length, array length
```

## Updating

Any queries that work with `Collection.find` will also work with `Collection.update`.

Updating documents involves applying various mutation operators to whichever documents match the provided query, i.e.: `update(query, mutations)`.

The following mutation operators are available, and should support most, if not all, use cases:

- [$set](tests/specs/operators/mutation/set.test.ts)

  ```typescript
  // given
  // { a: 1 }
  update({ a: 1 }, { $set: { a: 2 }}) // -> { a: 2 }
  update({ a: 1 }, { $set: { b: 2 }}) // -> { a: 1, b: 2 }
  update({ a: 1 }, { $set: { ...someObject }}) // -> { a: 1, ...someObject }
  ```

- [$unset](tests/specs/operators/mutation/unset.test.ts)

  ```typescript
  // given
  // { a: 1, b: { c: 2 } }
  update({ a: 1 }, { $unset: "b.c" }) // -> { a: 1 }
  update({ a: 1 }, { $unset: ["a", "b.c"] }) // -> {}
  // given
  // { a: 1, b: [{ c: 1, d: 1 }, { c: 2, d: 2 }] }
  update({ a: 1 }, { $unset: "b.*.c" }) // -> { a: 1, b: [{ d: 1 }, { d: 2 }] }
  ```

- [$change](tests/specs/operators/mutation/change.test.ts)

  `$set`, but refuses to create new properties.

  ```typescript
  // given
  // { a: 1 }
  update({ a: 1 }, { $change: { a: 2 }}) // -> { a: 2 }
  update({ a: 1 }, { $change: { b: 2 }}) // -> { a: 1 }, no property created
  ```

- [$push](tests/specs/operators/mutation/push.test.ts)

  Push will concat an item or items to an array. It refuses to create the target array if it does not exist.

  ```typescript
  // given
  // { a: 1, b: [1] }
  update({ a: 1 }, { $push: { b: 2 }}) // -> { a: 1, b: [1, 2] }
  update({ a: 1 }, { $push: { b: [2, 3] }}) // -> { a: 1, b: [1, 2, 3] }
  // given
  // { a: 1 }
  update({ a: 1 }, { $push: { b: 2 }}) // -> { a: 1 }, no property created
  // given
  // { a: 1, b: { c: [] } }
  update({ $has: "b.c" }, { $push: { "b.c": 1 }}) // -> { a: 1, b: { c: [1] } }
  ```

- [$unshift](tests/specs/operators/mutation/unshift.test.ts)

  Unshift will insert new elements to the start of the target array. It refuses to create the target array if it does not exist.

  ```typescript
  // given
  // { a: 1, b: [1] }
  update({ a: 1 }, { $unshift: { b: 2 }}) // -> { a: 1, b: [2, 1] }
  update({ a: 1 }, { $unshift: { b: [2, 3] }}) // -> { a: 1, b: [2, 3, 1] }
  // given
  // { a: 1 }
  update({ a: 1 }, { $unshift: { b: 2 }}) // -> { a: 1 }, no property created
  // given
  // { a: 1, b: { c: [] } }
  update({ $has: "b.c" }, { $unshift: { "b.c": 1 }}) // -> { a: 1, b: { c: [1] } }
  ```

- [$merge](tests/specs/operators/mutation/merge.test.ts)

  Merge the provided object into the documents that match the query.

  ```typescript
  // given
  // { a: 1, b: { c: 5 }}
  update({ a: 1 }, { $merge: { a: 2, b: { d: 6 }}}) // -> { a: 2, b: { c: 5, d: 6 } }
  update({ c: 5 }, { $merge: { a: 2 }}) // -> { a: 1, b: { c: 5, a: 2 }}
  update({ c: 5 }, { $merge: { ...someObject }}) // -> { a: 1, b: { c: 5, ...someObject }}
  ```

- [$map](tests/specs/operators/mutation/map.test.ts)

  Effectively `Array.map` against only the documents that match the query.

  ```typescript
  // given
  // { a: 1 }
  // { a: 2 }
  update({ a: 1 }, { $map: (doc) => ({ ...doc, d: 1 }) }) // -> { a: 1, d: 1 }, { a: 2 }
  ```

- [$inc, $dec, $mult, $div](tests/specs/operators/mutation/math.test.ts)

  ```typescript
  // increase population, creating the property if it doesn't exist.
  update({ planet: "Earth" }, { $inc: { population: 1 } });
  ```

## Removing

See the [remove tests](tests/specs/remove/basic.test.ts) for more examples.

Any queries that work with `.find` work with `.remove`.

```typescript
// remove every planet except Earth
remove({ $not: { planet: "Earth" } });
```

## Query options

`find`, `update` and `remove` accept a `QueryOptions` object.

```typescript
{
  /** When true, attempts to deeply match the query against documents. */
  deep: boolean;

  /** Provide fallback values for null or undefined properties */
  ifNull: Record<string, any>;

  /** Provide fallback values for 'empty' properties ([], {}, "") */
  ifEmpty: Record<string, any>;

  /** Provide fallback values for null, undefined, or 'empty' properties. */
  ifNullOrEmpty: Record<string, any>;

  /**
   * -1 || 0: descending
   *  1: ascending
   */
  sort: { [property: string]: -1 | 0 | 1 };

  /**
   * Particularly useful when sorting, `skip` defines the number of documents
   * to ignore from the beginning of the result set.
   */
  skip: number;

  /** Determines the number of documents returned. */
  take: number;

  /**
   * 1: property included in result document
   * 0: property excluded from result document
   */
  project: {
    [property: string]: 0 | 1;
  };

  aggregate: {
    [property: string]:
      Record<"$floor", string> |
      Record<"$ceil", string> |
      Record<"$sub", (string|number)[]> |
      Record<"$mult", (string|number)[]> |
      Record<"$div", (string|number)[]> |
      Record<"$add", (string|number)[]> |
      Record<"$fn", (document) => unknown>;
  };

  join: Array<{
    /** The collection to join on. */
    collection: Collection<any>;

    /** The property containing the foreign key(s). */
    from: string;

    /** The property on the joining collection that the foreign key should point to. */
    on: string;

    /** The name of the property to be created while will contain the joined documents. */
    as: string;

    /** QueryOptions that will be applied to the joined collection. */
    options?: QueryOptions;
  }>;
}
```

### ifNull

See the [ifNull tests](tests/specs/options/ifNull.test.ts) for more examples.

```typescript
// [
//   { a: 1, b: 2, c: 3 },
// ];

find({ a: 1 }, { ifNull: { d: 4 } });

// [
//   { a: 1, b: 2, c: 3, d: 4 },
// ];
```

### ifEmpty

See the [ifEmpty tests](tests/specs/options/ifEmpty.test.ts) for more examples.

```typescript
// [
//   { a: 1, b: 2, c: 3, d: "  " },
//   { a: 1, b: 2, c: 3, d: [] },
//   { a: 1, b: 2, c: 3, d: {} },
// ];

find({ a: 1 }, { ifEmpty: { d: 4 } });

// [
//   { a: 1, b: 2, c: 3, d: 4 },
//   { a: 1, b: 2, c: 3, d: 4 },
//   { a: 1, b: 2, c: 3, d: 4 },
// ];
```

### Sorting

See the [sort tests](tests/specs/options/sort.test.ts) for more examples.

```typescript
// [
//   { name: "Deanna Troi", age: 28 },
//   { name: "Worf", age: 24 },
//   { name: "Xorf", age: 24 },
//   { name: "Zorf", age: 24 },
//   { name: "Jean-Luc Picard", age: 59 },
//   { name: "William Riker", age: 29 },
// ];

find({ age: { $gt: 1 } }, { sort: { age: 1, name: -1 } });
//                                                  └─ asc    └─ desc

// [
//   { name: "Zorf", age: 24 },
//   { name: "Xorf", age: 24 },
//   { name: "Worf", age: 24 },
//   { name: "Deanna Troi", age: 28 },
//   { name: "William Riker", age: 29 },
//   { name: "Jean-Luc Picard", age: 59 },
// ];
```

### Skip & take (i.e. LIMIT)

See the [skip & take tests](tests/specs/options/skip_take.test.ts) for more examples.

Mostly useful when paired with `sort`.

```typescript
// [
//   { a: 1, b: 1, c: 1 },
//   { a: 2, b: 2, c: 2 },
//   { a: 3, b: 3, c: 3 },
// ];

find({ a: { $gt: 0 } }, { skip: 1, take: 1 });

// [
//   { a: 2, b: 2, c: 2 },
// ];
```

### Projection

See the [project tests](tests/specs/options/project.test.ts) for more examples.

The ID property of a document is always included unless explicitly excluded.

#### Implicit exclusion

When all projected properties have a value of `1`, this
is "implicit exclusion" mode.

In this mode, all document properties that are not defined
in the projection are excluded from the result document.

```typescript
// [
//   { a: 1, b: 1, c: 1 },
// ];

find({ a: 1 }, { project: { b: 1 } });

// [
//   { _id: .., b: 1 },
// ];
```

#### Implicit inclusion

When all projected properties have a value of `0`, this
is "implicit inclusion" mode.

In this mode, all document properties that are not defined
in the projection are included from the result document.

```typescript
// [
//   { a: 1, b: 1, c: 1 },
// ];

find({ a: 1 }, { project: { b: 0 } });

// [
//   { _id: .., a: 1, c: 1 },
// ];
```

#### Explicit

In the only remaining case, all document properties
are included unless explicitly removed with a `0`.

This is effectively the same behavior as implicit inclusion.

```typescript
// [
//   { a: 1, b: 1, c: 1 },
// ];

find({ a: 1 }, { project: { b: 1, c: 0 } });

// [
//   { _id: .., a: 1, b: 1 },
// ];
```

### Aggregation

See the [project tests](tests/specs/options/project.test.ts) for more examples.

You can use aggregation to create intermediate properties derived from other document properties, and then project those intermediate properties out of the result set.

```typescript
// [
//   { math: 72, english: 82, science: 92 },
//   { math: 60, english: 70, science: 80 },
//   { math: 90, english: 72, science: 84 }
// ]

find(
  {},
  {
    aggregate: {
      total: { $add: ["math", "english", "science"] },
      average: { $div: ["total", 3] },
    },
    project: {
      _id: 0,
      total: 0,
    },
  }
);

// [
//   { math: 72, english: 82, science: 92, average: 82 },
//   { math: 60, english: 70, science: 80, average: 70 },
//   { math: 90, english: 72, science: 84, average: 82 },
// ]
```

You can also use dot notation to reference deeply-nested properties, e.g.:

```typescript
find(
  {},
  aggregate: {
    // ...
    total: { $add: ["scores.math", "scores.english", "scores.science" ] },
    // ...
  }
);
```

Define arbitrary functions to be used as the aggregation handler:

```typescript
find(
  { $has: ["first", "last"] },
  {
    aggregate: {
      fullName: { $fn: (doc) => `${doc.first} ${doc.last}` },
    },
  }
);
```

### Joining

See the [join.test.ts](tests/specs/options/join.test.ts) for more examples.

Joining allows you to join data from other collections.

```typescript
// "users" collection

// [
//   { name: "Alice", purchasedTicketIds: [1, 2] },
// ];

// "tickets" collection

// [
//   { _id: 0, seat: "A1" },
//   { _id: 1, seat: "B1" },
//   { _id: 2, seat: "C1" },
//   { _id: 3, seat: "D1" },
// ];

users.find(
  { name: "Alice" },
  {
    join: [
      {
        collection: tickets,
        from: "purchasedTicketIds",
        on: "_id",
        as: "tickets",
        options: {
          project: { _id: 0 },
        },
      },
    ],
  }
);

// [
//   {
//     name: "Alice",
//     purchasedTicketIds: [1, 2],
//     tickets: [
//       { seat: "B1" },
//       { seat: "C1" },
//     ],
//   },
// ];
```

You can also use dot notation when defining the `from` or `as` fields:

```typescript
// "inventory" collection

// {
//   name: "Bob",
//   items: [
//     { itemId: 3, quantity: 1 }, <-- we want to join on these `id` properties
//     { itemId: 5, quantity: 2 },
//   ],
// }

// "items" collection

// [
//   { _id: 3, name: "The Unstoppable Force", atk: 100 },
//   { _id: 4, name: "Sneakers", agi: 100 },
//   { _id: 5, name: "The Immovable Object", def: 100 },
// ]

users.find(
  { name: "Bob" },
  {
    join: [
      {
        collection: items,
        from: "items.*.itemId",
        on: "_id",
        as: "items.*.itemData", // creates a new `itemData` property for each item in `from`
        options: {
          project: { _id: 0, _created_at: 0, _updated_at: 0 },
        }
      },
    ],
  }
);

// [
//   {
//     name: "Bob",
//     items: [
//       { itemId: 3, quantity: 1, itemData: { name: "The Unstoppable Force", atk: 100 } },
//       { itemId: 5, quantity: 2, itemData: { name: "The Immovable Object", def: 100 } },
//     ],
//   }
// ]
```

`join` allows for `options` (type `QueryOptions`) which in turn allows for `join`.
Said another way, joins can be nested infinitely for more hierarchical relationships between collections.

```typescript
users.find(
  { .. },
  {
    join: [{
      collection: tickets,
      options: {
        join: [{
          collection: seats,
          options: {
            join: [{
              collection: auditoriums,
            }]
          }
        }]
      }
    }]
  }
);
```

## Misc

### Builtin property name defaults

The default property names for document ID (default `_id`), "created at"
(default `_created_at`) and "updated at" (default `_updated_at`) timestamps can all be changed.

```typescript
import { ID_KEY, CREATED_AT_KEY, UPDATED_AT_KEY } from "@prsm/arc";

ID_KEY = "id";
CREATED_AT_KEY = "createdAt";
UPDATED_AT_KEY = "updatedAt";
```

If you do this, make sure to do it at the beginning of collection creation.

### Documents

The returned value from `find`, `update` and `remove` is always an `Array<T>`, even when there
are no results.

Commit message:

Allow any index value that can be made into a string.

README.md, after:

# arc

Lightweight, in-memory, optionally persistent, 100% JavaScript document database. Use it in node. Use it in the browser with the localStorage adapter. Use it as the embedded database solution for your electron app.

*This library is under active development and the API is likely to evolve as features are expanded, however it's unlikely that there will be any breaking changes.*

* [Installation](#installation)
* [API overview](#api-overview)
  * [Creating a collection](#creating-a-collection)
  * [Persistence](#persistence)
    * [Storage adapters](#storage-adapters)
    * [Using another adapter](#using-another-adapter)
    * [Auto sync](#auto-sync)
  * [Indexing](#indexing)
  * [Inserting](#inserting)
  * [Finding](#finding)
  * [Updating](#updating)
  * [Removing](#removing)
  * [Query options](#query-options)
    * [ifNull](#ifnull)
    * [ifEmpty](#ifempty)
    * [Sorting](#sorting)
    * [Skip & take (i.e. LIMIT)](#skip--take-ie-limit)
    * [Projection](#projection)
      * [Implicit exclusion](#implicit-exclusion)
      * [Implicit inclusion](#implicit-inclusion)
      * [Explicit](#explicit)
    * [Aggregation](#aggregation)
    * [Joining](#joining)
  * [Misc](#misc)
    * [Builtin property name defaults](#builtin-property-name-defaults)
    * [Documents](#documents)

# Installation

```bash
npm i @prsm/arc
```

# API overview

For a more thorough API reference, please look at the tests in this repository.

## Creating a collection

A collection is just a `.json` file when you're using the default `FSAdapter`.

```typescript
import { Collection } from "@prsm/arc";

type Planet = {
  planet: string;
  diameter: number;
  population?: number;
  temp: {
    avg: number;
  };
};

// from `./.data` load or create `planets.json`
const collection = new Collection<Planet>(".data", "planets");
```

## Persistence

### Storage adapters

How data is read and written depends on which `StorageAdapter` the collection is using. The default storage adapter is the `FSAdapter` and, unsurprisingly, it reads and writes to a file. For persistence in a browser environment, you can use the provided `LocalStorageAdapter`, or create your own adapter by implementing the `StorageAdapter` interface. There is also an `EncryptedFSAdapter`, which encrypts before writing and decrypts before reading.

### Using another adapter

```typescript
import { EncryptedFSAdapter } from "@prsm/arc";

process.env.ARC_ENCFS_KEY = "Mahpsee2X7TKLe1xwJYmar91pCSaZIY7";

const path = ".data";
const name = "planets";

const adapter = new EncryptedFSAdapter(path, name);
new Collection(path, name, { adapter });
```

### Auto sync

By default, any operation that mutates data is followed by a sync using whichever adapter the collection was initialized with. You can disable this `autosync` feature when creating the collection:

```typescript
new Collection(".data", "planets", { autosync: false });
```

When `autosync` is disabled, you must call `collection.sync()` to persist, which calls the in-use adapter's `write` method.

## Indexing

- Indexes can be deeply nested properties, e.g.: `createIndex({ key: "planet.composition.type" })`

  When defining indexes using dot notation, the performance benefit of using indexes is the same whether you choose to find documents by using dot notation syntax or object syntax. In other words, the queries below provide the same performance benefit.

  ```typescript
  find({ "planet.composition.type": "gas" });
  find({ planet: { composition: { type: "gas" }}});
  ```

- The value of the key must be something that can be converted to a string with `String(value)`.
- Indexes can optionally enforce a unique constraint, e.g.: `createIndex({ key: "planet.life.dominant_species", unique: true })`
- You can create an index at any time, even if your database has existing records with the index key provided, although ideally they are defined at the point of database creation.

In large databases, ***especially*** with complex documents, you will see a noticeable performance boost when making practical use of indexes:

In a collection made up of 1,000,000 documents of moderately complex shape:

```typescript
{
  name: string
  age: number,
  thing: number[],
  things: { a: { b: number }, b: { stuff: number[] } },
}
```

- With an index on `age`, a `find({ age: 350_000 })` takes an average of 25ms.
- Without an index on `age`, a `find({ age: 350_000 })` takes an average of 2s.

YMMV.

## Inserting

See the [inserting tests](tests/specs/insert/basic.test.ts) for more examples.

```typescript
insert({ planet: "Mercury", diameter: 4_880, temp: { avg: 475 } });
insert([
  { planet: "Venus", diameter: 12_104, temp: { avg: 737_000 } },
  { planet: "Earth", diameter: 12_742, temp: { avg: 288 } },
]);
```

## Finding

See the [finding tests](tests/specs/finding/basic.test.ts) for more examples.

```typescript
// finds Earth document
find({ avg: 288 }); // implicit deep searching
find({ planet: "Earth" });

// finds Venus and Earth documents
find({ diameter: { $gt: 12_000 } });

// finds Mercury and Earth documents
find({ temp: { avg: { $lt: 1_000 } } });

// finds Mercury and Earth documents
find({ $and: [{ avg: { $gt: 100 } }, { avg: { $lt: 10_000 } }] });

// etc.
find({ $not: { a: 1, b: 2 } });
find({ $and: [{ $not: { a: { $lte: 2 }}}, { $not: { a: { $gte: 5 }}}] });
find({ $xor: [{ a: { $includes: "ba" } }, { num: { $lt: 9 } }] });
find({ a: { $oneOf: [2, 3] } });
find({ a: { $length: 3 } }); // string length, array length
```

## Updating

Any queries that work with `Collection.find` will also work with `Collection.update`.

Updating documents involves applying various mutation operators to whichever documents match the provided query, i.e.: `update(query, mutations)`.

The following mutation operators are available, and should support most, if not all, use cases:

- [$set](tests/specs/operators/mutation/set.test.ts)

  ```typescript
  // given
  // { a: 1 }
  update({ a: 1 }, { $set: { a: 2 }}) // -> { a: 2 }
  update({ a: 1 }, { $set: { b: 2 }}) // -> { a: 1, b: 2 }
  update({ a: 1 }, { $set: { ...someObject }}) // -> { a: 1, ...someObject }
  ```

- [$unset](tests/specs/operators/mutation/unset.test.ts)

  ```typescript
  // given
  // { a: 1, b: { c: 2 } }
  update({ a: 1 }, { $unset: "b.c" }) // -> { a: 1 }
  update({ a: 1 }, { $unset: ["a", "b.c"] }) // -> {}
  // given
  // { a: 1, b: [{ c: 1, d: 1 }, { c: 2, d: 2 }] }
  update({ a: 1 }, { $unset: "b.*.c" }) // -> { a: 1, b: [{ d: 1 }, { d: 2 }] }
  ```

- [$change](tests/specs/operators/mutation/change.test.ts)

  `$set`, but refuses to create new properties.

  ```typescript
  // given
  // { a: 1 }
  update({ a: 1 }, { $change: { a: 2 }}) // -> { a: 2 }
  update({ a: 1 }, { $change: { b: 2 }}) // -> { a: 1 }, no property created
  ```

- [$push](tests/specs/operators/mutation/push.test.ts)

  Push will concat an item or items to an array. It refuses to create the target array if it does not exist.

  ```typescript
  // given
  // { a: 1, b: [1] }
  update({ a: 1 }, { $push: { b: 2 }}) // -> { a: 1, b: [1, 2] }
  update({ a: 1 }, { $push: { b: [2, 3] }}) // -> { a: 1, b: [1, 2, 3] }
  // given
  // { a: 1 }
  update({ a: 1 }, { $push: { b: 2 }}) // -> { a: 1 }, no property created
  // given
  // { a: 1, b: { c: [] } }
  update({ $has: "b.c" }, { $push: { "b.c": 1 }}) // -> { a: 1, b: { c: [1] } }
  ```

- [$unshift](tests/specs/operators/mutation/unshift.test.ts)

  Unshift will insert new elements to the start of the target array. It refuses to create the target array if it does not exist.

  ```typescript
  // given
  // { a: 1, b: [1] }
  update({ a: 1 }, { $unshift: { b: 2 }}) // -> { a: 1, b: [2, 1] }
  update({ a: 1 }, { $unshift: { b: [2, 3] }}) // -> { a: 1, b: [2, 3, 1] }
  // given
  // { a: 1 }
  update({ a: 1 }, { $unshift: { b: 2 }}) // -> { a: 1 }, no property created
  // given
  // { a: 1, b: { c: [] } }
  update({ $has: "b.c" }, { $unshift: { "b.c": 1 }}) // -> { a: 1, b: { c: [1] } }
  ```

- [$merge](tests/specs/operators/mutation/merge.test.ts)

  Merge the provided object into the documents that match the query.

  ```typescript
  // given
  // { a: 1, b: { c: 5 }}
  update({ a: 1 }, { $merge: { a: 2, b: { d: 6 }}}) // -> { a: 2, b: { c: 5, d: 6 } }
  update({ c: 5 }, { $merge: { a: 2 }}) // -> { a: 1, b: { c: 5, a: 2 }}
  update({ c: 5 }, { $merge: { ...someObject }}) // -> { a: 1, b: { c: 5, ...someObject }}
  ```

- [$map](tests/specs/operators/mutation/map.test.ts)

  Effectively `Array.map` against only the documents that match the query.

  ```typescript
  // given
  // { a: 1 }
  // { a: 2 }
  update({ a: 1 }, { $map: (doc) => ({ ...doc, d: 1 }) }) // -> { a: 1, d: 1 }, { a: 2 }
  ```

- [$inc, $dec, $mult, $div](tests/specs/operators/mutation/math.test.ts)

  ```typescript
  // increase population, creating the property if it doesn't exist.
  update({ planet: "Earth" }, { $inc: { population: 1 } });
  ```

## Removing

See the [remove tests](tests/specs/remove/basic.test.ts) for more examples.

Any queries that work with `.find` work with `.remove`.

```typescript
// remove every planet except Earth
remove({ $not: { planet: "Earth" } });
```

## Query options

`find`, `update` and `remove` accept a `QueryOptions` object.

```typescript
{
  /** When true, attempts to deeply match the query against documents. */
  deep: boolean;

  /** Provide fallback values for null or undefined properties */
  ifNull: Record<string, any>;

  /** Provide fallback values for 'empty' properties ([], {}, "") */
  ifEmpty: Record<string, any>;

  /** Provide fallback values for null, undefined, or 'empty' properties. */
  ifNullOrEmpty: Record<string, any>;

  /**
   * -1 || 0: descending
   *  1: ascending
   */
  sort: { [property: string]: -1 | 0 | 1 };

  /**
   * Particularly useful when sorting, `skip` defines the number of documents
   * to ignore from the beginning of the result set.
   */
  skip: number;

  /** Determines the number of documents returned. */
  take: number;

  /**
   * 1: property included in result document
   * 0: property excluded from result document
   */
  project: {
    [property: string]: 0 | 1;
  };

  aggregate: {
    [property: string]:
      Record<"$floor", string> |
      Record<"$ceil", string> |
      Record<"$sub", (string|number)[]> |
      Record<"$mult", (string|number)[]> |
      Record<"$div", (string|number)[]> |
      Record<"$add", (string|number)[]> |
      Record<"$fn", (document) => unknown>;
  };

  join: Array<{
    /** The collection to join on. */
    collection: Collection<any>;

    /** The property containing the foreign key(s). */
    from: string;

    /** The property on the joining collection that the foreign key should point to. */
    on: string;

    /** The name of the property to be created while will contain the joined documents. */
    as: string;

    /** QueryOptions that will be applied to the joined collection. */
    options?: QueryOptions;
  }>;
}
```

### ifNull

See the [ifNull tests](tests/specs/options/ifNull.test.ts) for more examples.

```typescript
// [
//   { a: 1, b: 2, c: 3 },
// ];

find({ a: 1 }, { ifNull: { d: 4 } });

// [
//   { a: 1, b: 2, c: 3, d: 4 },
// ];
```

### ifEmpty

See the [ifEmpty tests](tests/specs/options/ifEmpty.test.ts) for more examples.

```typescript
// [
//   { a: 1, b: 2, c: 3, d: "  " },
//   { a: 1, b: 2, c: 3, d: [] },
//   { a: 1, b: 2, c: 3, d: {} },
// ];

find({ a: 1 }, { ifEmpty: { d: 4 } });

// [
//   { a: 1, b: 2, c: 3, d: 4 },
//   { a: 1, b: 2, c: 3, d: 4 },
//   { a: 1, b: 2, c: 3, d: 4 },
// ];
```

### Sorting

See the [sort tests](tests/specs/options/sort.test.ts) for more examples.

```typescript
// [
//   { name: "Deanna Troi", age: 28 },
//   { name: "Worf", age: 24 },
//   { name: "Xorf", age: 24 },
//   { name: "Zorf", age: 24 },
//   { name: "Jean-Luc Picard", age: 59 },
//   { name: "William Riker", age: 29 },
// ];

find({ age: { $gt: 1 } }, { sort: { age: 1, name: -1 } });
//                                                  └─ asc    └─ desc

// [
//   { name: "Zorf", age: 24 },
//   { name: "Xorf", age: 24 },
//   { name: "Worf", age: 24 },
//   { name: "Deanna Troi", age: 28 },
//   { name: "William Riker", age: 29 },
//   { name: "Jean-Luc Picard", age: 59 },
// ];
```

### Skip & take (i.e. LIMIT)

See the [skip & take tests](tests/specs/options/skip_take.test.ts) for more examples.

Mostly useful when paired with `sort`.

```typescript
// [
//   { a: 1, b: 1, c: 1 },
//   { a: 2, b: 2, c: 2 },
//   { a: 3, b: 3, c: 3 },
// ];

find({ a: { $gt: 0 } }, { skip: 1, take: 1 });

// [
//   { a: 2, b: 2, c: 2 },
// ];
```

### Projection

See the [project tests](tests/specs/options/project.test.ts) for more examples.

The ID property of a document is always included unless explicitly excluded.

#### Implicit exclusion

When all projected properties have a value of `1`, this
is "implicit exclusion" mode.

In this mode, all document properties that are not defined
in the projection are excluded from the result document.

```typescript
// [
//   { a: 1, b: 1, c: 1 },
// ];

find({ a: 1 }, { project: { b: 1 } });

// [
//   { _id: .., b: 1 },
// ];
```

#### Implicit inclusion

When all projected properties have a value of `0`, this
is "implicit inclusion" mode.

In this mode, all document properties that are not defined
in the projection are included from the result document.

```typescript
// [
//   { a: 1, b: 1, c: 1 },
// ];

find({ a: 1 }, { project: { b: 0 } });

// [
//   { _id: .., a: 1, c: 1 },
// ];
```

#### Explicit

In the only remaining case, all document properties
are included unless explicitly removed with a `0`.

This is effectively the same behavior as implicit inclusion.

```typescript
// [
//   { a: 1, b: 1, c: 1 },
// ];

find({ a: 1 }, { project: { b: 1, c: 0 } });

// [
//   { _id: .., a: 1, b: 1 },
// ];
```

### Aggregation

See the [project tests](tests/specs/options/project.test.ts) for more examples.

You can use aggregation to create intermediate properties derived from other document properties, and then project those intermediate properties out of the result set.

```typescript
// [
//   { math: 72, english: 82, science: 92 },
//   { math: 60, english: 70, science: 80 },
//   { math: 90, english: 72, science: 84 }
// ]

find(
  {},
  {
    aggregate: {
      total: { $add: ["math", "english", "science"] },
      average: { $div: ["total", 3] },
    },
    project: {
      _id: 0,
      total: 0,
    },
  }
);

// [
//   { math: 72, english: 82, science: 92, average: 82 },
//   { math: 60, english: 70, science: 80, average: 70 },
//   { math: 90, english: 72, science: 84, average: 82 },
// ]
```

You can also use dot notation to reference deeply-nested properties, e.g.:

```typescript
find(
  {},
  aggregate: {
    // ...
    total: { $add: ["scores.math", "scores.english", "scores.science" ] },
    // ...
  }
);
```

Define arbitrary functions to be used as the aggregation handler:

```typescript
find(
  { $has: ["first", "last"] },
  {
    aggregate: {
      fullName: { $fn: (doc) => `${doc.first} ${doc.last}` },
    },
  }
);
```

### Joining

See the [join.test.ts](tests/specs/options/join.test.ts) for more examples.

Joining allows you to join data from other collections.

```typescript
// "users" collection

// [
//   { name: "Alice", purchasedTicketIds: [1, 2] },
// ];

// "tickets" collection

// [
//   { _id: 0, seat: "A1" },
//   { _id: 1, seat: "B1" },
//   { _id: 2, seat: "C1" },
//   { _id: 3, seat: "D1" },
// ];

users.find(
  { name: "Alice" },
  {
    join: [
      {
        collection: tickets,
        from: "purchasedTicketIds",
        on: "_id",
        as: "tickets",
        options: {
          project: { _id: 0 },
        },
      },
    ],
  }
);

// [
//   {
//     name: "Alice",
//     purchasedTicketIds: [1, 2],
//     tickets: [
//       { seat: "B1" },
//       { seat: "C1" },
//     ],
//   },
// ];
```

You can also use dot notation when defining the `from` or `as` fields:

```typescript
// "inventory" collection

// {
//   name: "Bob",
//   items: [
//     { itemId: 3, quantity: 1 }, <-- we want to join on these `id` properties
//     { itemId: 5, quantity: 2 },
//   ],
// }

// "items" collection

// [
//   { _id: 3, name: "The Unstoppable Force", atk: 100 },
//   { _id: 4, name: "Sneakers", agi: 100 },
//   { _id: 5, name: "The Immovable Object", def: 100 },
// ]

users.find(
  { name: "Bob" },
  {
    join: [
      {
        collection: items,
        from: "items.*.itemId",
        on: "_id",
        as: "items.*.itemData", // creates a new `itemData` property for each item in `from`
        options: {
          project: { _id: 0, _created_at: 0, _updated_at: 0 },
        }
      },
    ],
  }
);

// [
//   {
//     name: "Bob",
//     items: [
//       { itemId: 3, quantity: 1, itemData: { name: "The Unstoppable Force", atk: 100 } },
//       { itemId: 5, quantity: 2, itemData: { name: "The Immovable Object", def: 100 } },
//     ],
//   }
// ]
```

`join` allows for `options` (type `QueryOptions`) which in turn allows for `join`.
Said another way, joins can be nested infinitely for more hierarchical relationships between collections.

```typescript
users.find(
  { .. },
  {
    join: [{
      collection: tickets,
      options: {
        join: [{
          collection: seats,
          options: {
            join: [{
              collection: auditoriums,
            }]
          }
        }]
      }
    }]
  }
);
```

## Misc

### Builtin property name defaults

The default property names for document ID (default `_id`), "created at"
(default `_created_at`) and "updated at" (default `_updated_at`) timestamps can all be changed.

```typescript
import { ID_KEY, CREATED_AT_KEY, UPDATED_AT_KEY } from "@prsm/arc";

ID_KEY = "id";
CREATED_AT_KEY = "createdAt";
UPDATED_AT_KEY = "updatedAt";
```

If you do this, make sure to do it at the beginning of collection creation.

### Documents

The returned value from `find`, `update` and `remove` is always an `Array<T>`, even when there
are no results.
